prce-f
Trust in the Lord with all your heart; do not depend on your own understanding. Seek his will in all you do, and he will show you which path to take.
slg-k
Endure hardship as discipline. God disciplines us for our good, so that we might share in his holiness. No discipline seems pleasant at the time, but painful. But afterwards there will be a peaceful harvest of righteousness for those trained by it.
ps139w-x
Search me, O God, and know my heart; test me and know my anxious thoughts. Point out anything in me that offends you, and lead me in the way everlasting.
prpd
The Lord has made everything for his own purposes, even the wicked for a day of disaster.
prpe
The Lord detests the proud; they will surely be punished.
foa
We who are strong have an obligation to bear with the failings of the weak, and not to please ourselves.
fob
Let each of us please his neighbour for his good, to build him up.
lai
And so, from the day we heard, we have not ceased to pray for you, asking that you may be filled with the knowledge of his will in all spiritual wisdom and understanding,
laj
so as to walk in a manner worthy of the Lord, fully pleasing to him: bearing fruit in every good work and increasing in the knowledge of God;
lak
being strengthened with all power, according to his glorious might, for all endurance and patience with joy;
lal
giving thanks to the Father, who has qualified you to share in the inheritance of the saints in light.
aea
Seeing the crowds, he went up on the mountain, and when he sat down, his disciples came to him.
aeb
And he opened his mouth and taught them, saying:
aec
Blessed are the poor in spirit, for theirs is the kingdom of heaven.
aed
Blessed are those who mourn, for they will be comforted.
aee
Blessed are the meek, for they will inherit the earth.
aef
Blessed are those who hunger and thirst for righteousness, for they will be satisfied.
aeg
Blessed are the merciful, for they will receive mercy.
aeh
Blessed are the pure in heart, for they will see God.
aei
Blessed are the peacemakers, for they will be called sons of God.
aej
Blessed are those who are persecuted for righteousness' sake, for theirs is the kingdom of heaven.
aek
Blessed are you when others revile you and persecute you and utter all kinds of evil against you falsely on my account.
ael
Rejoice and be glad, for your reward is great in heaven, for so they persecuted the prophets who were before you.
aem
You are the salt of the earth, but if salt has lost its taste, how will its saltiness be restored? It is no longer good for anything except to be thrown out and trampled under people's feet.
aen
You are the light of the world. A city set on a hill cannot be hidden.
aeo
Nor do people light a lamp and put it under a basket, but on a stand, and it gives light to all in the house.
aep
In the same way, let your light shine before others, so that they may see your good works and give glory to your Father who is in heaven.
aeq
Do not think that I have come to abolish the Law or the Prophets; I have not come to abolish them but to fulfil them.
aer
For truly, I say to you, until heaven and earth pass away, not an iota, not a dot, will pass from the Law until all is accomplished.
aes
Therefore whoever relaxes one of the least of these commandments and teaches others to do the same will be called least in the kingdom of heaven, but whoever does them and teaches them will be called great in the kingdom of heaven.
aet
For I tell you, unless your righteousness exceeds that of the scribes and Pharisees, you will never enter the kingdom of heaven.
aeu
You have heard that it was said to those of old, "You shall not murder; and whoever murders will be liable to judgement."
aev
But I say to you that everyone who is angry with his brother will be liable to judgement; whoever insults his brother will be liable to the council; and whoever says, "You fool!" will be liable to the hell of fire.
aew
So if you are offering your gift at the altar and there remember that your brother has something against you,
aex
leave your gift there before the altar and go. First be reconciled to your brother, and then come and offer your gift.
aey
Come to terms quickly with your accuser while you are going with him to court, lest your accuser hand you over to the judge, and the judge to the guard, and you be put in prison.
aez
Truly, I say to you, you will never get out until you have paid the last penny.
aeç
You have heard that it was said, "You shall not commit adultery."
aeş
But I say to you that everyone who looks at a woman with lustful intent has already committed adultery with her in his heart.
aeö
If your right eye causes you to sin, tear it out and throw it away. For it is better that you lose one of your members than that your whole body be thrown into hell.
aeü
And if your right hand causes you to sin, cut it off and throw it away. For it is better that you lose one of your members than that your whole body go into hell.
aeA
It was also said, "Whoever divorces his wife, let him give her a certificate of divorce."
aeB
But I say to you that everyone who divorces his wife, except on the ground of sexual immorality, makes her commit adultery, and whoever marries a divorced woman commits adultery.
aeC
Again you have heard that it was said to those of old, "You shall not swear falsely, but shall perform to the Lord what you have sworn."
aeD
But I say to you, Do not take an oath at all, either by heaven, for it is the throne of God,
aeE
or by the earth, for it is his footstool, or by Jerusalem, for it is the city of the great King.
aeF
And do not take an oath by your head, for you cannot make one hair white or black.
aeG
Let what you say be simply "Yes" or "No"; anything more than this comes from evil.
aeH
You have heard that it was said, "An eye for an eye and a tooth for a tooth."
aeI
But I say to you, Do not resist the one who is evil. But if anyone slaps you on the right cheek, turn to him the other also.
aeJ
And if anyone would sue you and take your tunic, let him have your cloak as well.
aeK
And if anyone forces you to go one mile, go with him two miles.
aeL
Give to the one who begs from you, and do not refuse the one who would borrow from you.
aeM
You have heard that it was said, "You shall love your neighbour and hate your enemy."
aeN
But I say to you, Love your enemies and pray for those who persecute you,
aeO
so that you may be sons of your Father who is in heaven. For he makes his sun rise on the evil and on the good, and sends rain on the just and on the unjust.
aeP
For if you love those who love you, what reward do you have? Do not even the tax collectors do the same?
aeQ
And if you greet only your brothers, what more are you doing than others? Do not even the Gentiles do the same?
aeR
You therefore must be perfect, as your heavenly Father is perfect.
pspa
Preserve me, O God, for in you I take refuge.
pspb
I say to the Lord, "You are my Lord; I have no good apart from you."
pspc
As for the saints in the land, they are the excellent ones, in whom is all my delight.
pspd
The sorrows of those who run after another god will multiply; their drink offerings of blood I will not pour out or take their names on my lips.
pspe
The Lord is my chosen portion and my cup; you hold my lot.
pspf
The lines have fallen for me in pleasant places; indeed, I have a beautiful inheritance.
pspg
I bless the Lord who gives me counsel; in the night also my heart instructs me.
psph
I have set the Lord always before me; because he is at my right hand, I will not be shaken.
pspi
Therefore my heart is glad, and my whole being rejoices; my flesh also dwells secure.
pspj
For you will not abandon my soul to Sheol, or let your holy one see corruption.
pspk
You make known to me the path of life; in your presence there is fullness of joy; at your right hand are pleasures forevermore.
taa
James, a servant of God and of the Lord Jesus Christ, To the twelve tribes in the Dispersion: Greetings.
tab
Count it all joy, my brothers, when you meet trials of various kinds,
tac
for you know that the testing of your faith produces steadfastness.
tad
And let steadfastness have its full effect, that you may be perfect and complete, lacking in nothing.
tae
If any of you lacks wisdom, let him ask God, who gives generously to all without reproach, and it will be given him.
taf
But let him ask in faith, with no doubting, for the one who doubts is like a wave of the sea that is driven and tossed by the wind.
tag
For that person must not suppose that he will receive anything from the Lord;
tah
he is a double-minded man, unstable in all his ways.
tai
Let the lowly brother boast in his exaltation,
taj
and the rich in his humiliation, because like a flower of the grass he will pass away.
tak
For the sun rises with its scorching heat and withers the grass; its flower falls, and its beauty perishes. So also will the rich man fade away in the midst of his pursuits.
tal
Blessed is the man who remains steadfast under trial, for when he has stood the test he will receive the crown of life, which God has promised to those who love him.
tam
Let no one say when he is tempted, "I am being tempted by God", for God cannot be tempted with evil, and he himself tempts no one.
tan
But each person is tempted when he is lured and enticed by his own desire.
tao
Then desire when it has conceived gives birth to sin, and sin when it is fully grown brings forth death.
tap
Do not be deceived, my beloved brothers.
taq
Every good gift and every perfect gift is from above, coming down from the Father of lights, with whom there is no variation or shadow due to change.
tar
Of his own will he brought us forth by the word of truth, that we should be a kind of firstfruits of his creatures.
tas
Know this, my beloved brothers: let every person be quick to hear, slow to speak, slow to anger;
tat
for the anger of man does not produce the righteousness of God.
tau
Therefore put away all filthiness and rampant wickedness and receive with meekness the implanted word, which is able to save your souls.
tav
But be doers of the word, and not hearers only, deceiving yourselves.
taw
For if anyone is a hearer of the word and not a doer, he is like a man who looks intently at his natural face in a mirror.
tax
For he looks at himself and goes away and at once forgets what he was like.
tay
But the one who looks into the perfect law, the law of liberty, and perseveres, being no hearer who forgets but a doer who acts, he will be blessed in his doing.
taz
If anyone thinks he is religious and does not bridle his tongue but deceives his heart, this person's religion is worthless.
taç
Religion that is pure and undefiled before God the Father is this: to visit orphans and widows in their affliction, and to keep oneself unstained from the world.
jerqe
Thus says the Lord: "Cursed is the man who trusts in man and makes flesh his strength, whose heart turns away from the Lord.
jerqf
He is like a shrub in the desert, and will not see any good come. He will dwell in the parched places of the wilderness, in an uninhabited salt land.
jerqg
Blessed is the man who trusts in the Lord, whose trust is the Lord.
jerqh
He is like a tree planted by water, that sends out its roots by the stream, and does not fear when heat comes, for its leaves remain green, and is not anxious in the year of drought, for it does not cease to bear fruit."
jerqi
The heart is deceitful above all things, and desperately sick; who can understand it?
jerqj
"I the Lord search the heart and test the mind, to give every man according to his ways, according to the fruit of his deeds."
ubk
Beloved, I urge you as sojourners and exiles to abstain from the passions of the flesh, which wage war against your soul.
cri
He also told this parable to some who trusted in themselves that they were righteous, and treated others with contempt:
crj
"Two men went up into the temple to pray, one a Pharisee and the other a tax collector.
crk
The Pharisee, standing by himself, prayed thus: "God, I thank you that I am not like other men, extortioners, unjust, adulterers, or even like this tax collector.
crl
I fast twice a week; I give tithes of all that I get."
crm
But the tax collector, standing far off, would not even lift up his eyes to heaven, but beat his breast, saying, "God, be merciful to me, a sinner!"
crn
I tell you, this man went down to his house justified, rather than the other. For everyone who exalts himself will be humbled, but the one who humbles himself will be exalted."
afa
Beware of practising your righteousness before other people in order to be seen by them, for then you will have no reward from your Father who is in heaven.
afb
Thus, when you give to the needy, sound no trumpet before you, as the hypocrites do in the synagogues and in the streets, that they may be praised by others. Truly, I say to you, they have received their reward.
afc
But when you give to the needy, do not let your left hand know what your right hand is doing,
afd
so that your giving may be in secret. And your Father who sees in secret will reward you.
afe
And when you pray, you must not be like the hypocrites. For they love to stand and pray in the synagogues and at the street corners, that they may be seen by others. Truly, I say to you, they have received their reward.
aff
But when you pray, go into your room and shut the door and pray to your Father who is in secret. And your Father who sees in secret will reward you.
afg
And when you pray, do not heap up empty phrases as the Gentiles do, for they think that they will be heard for their many words.
afh
Do not be like them, for your Father knows what you need before you ask him.
afi
Pray then like this: Our Father in heaven, hallowed be your name.
afj
Your kingdom come, your will be done, on earth as it is in heaven.
afk
Give us this day our daily bread,
afl
and forgive us our debts, as we also have forgiven our debtors.
afm
And lead us not into temptation, but deliver us from evil.
afn
For if you forgive others their trespasses, your heavenly Father will also forgive you,
afo
but if you do not forgive others their trespasses, neither will your Father forgive your trespasses.
afp
And when you fast, do not look gloomy like the hypocrites, for they disfigure their faces that their fasting may be seen by others. Truly, I say to you, they have received their reward.
afq
But when you fast, anoint your head and wash your face,
afr
that your fasting may not be seen by others but by your Father who is in secret. And your Father who sees in secret will reward you.
afs
Do not lay up for yourselves treasures on earth, where moth and rust destroy and where thieves break in and steal,
aft
but lay up for yourselves treasures in heaven, where neither moth nor rust destroys and where thieves do not break in and steal.
afu
For where your treasure is, there your heart will be also.
afv
The eye is the lamp of the body. So, if your eye is healthy, your whole body will be full of light,
afw
but if your eye is bad, your whole body will be full of darkness. If then the light in you is darkness, how great is the darkness!
afx
No one can serve two masters, for either he will hate the one and love the other, or he will be devoted to the one and despise the other. You cannot serve God and money.
afy
Therefore I tell you, do not be anxious about your life, what you will eat or what you will drink, nor about your body, what you will put on. Is not life more than food, and the body more than clothing?
afz
Look at the birds of the air: they neither sow nor reap nor gather into barns, and yet your heavenly Father feeds them. Are you not of more value than they?
afç
And which of you by being anxious can add a single hour to his span of life?
afş
And why are you anxious about clothing? Consider the lilies of the field, how they grow: they neither toil nor spin,
afö
yet I tell you, even Solomon in all his glory was not arrayed like one of these.
afü
But if God so clothes the grass of the field, which today is alive and tomorrow is thrown into the oven, will he not much more clothe you, O you of little faith?
afA
Therefore do not be anxious, saying, "What will we eat?" or "What will we drink?" or "What will we wear?"
afB
For the Gentiles seek after all these things, and your heavenly Father knows that you need them all.
afC
But seek first the kingdom of God and his righteousness, and all these things will be added to you.
afD
Therefore do not be anxious about tomorrow, for tomorrow will be anxious for itself. Sufficient for the day is its own trouble.
fhş
And we know that for those who love God all things work together for good, for those who are called according to his purpose.
ban
Now after John was arrested, Jesus came into Galilee, proclaiming the gospel of God,
bao
and saying, "The time is fulfilled, and the kingdom of God is at hand; repent and believe in the gospel."
gaq
For Christ did not send me to baptise but to preach the gospel, and not with words of eloquent wisdom, lest the cross of Christ be emptied of its power.
gmd
Love is patient and kind; love does not envy or boast; it is not arrogant
gme
or rude. It does not insist on its own way; it is not irritable or resentful;
gmf
it does not rejoice at wrongdoing, but rejoices with the truth.
gmg
Love bears all things, believes all things, hopes all things, endures all things.
psya
To you, O Lord, I lift up my soul.
psyb
O my God, in you I trust; let me not be put to shame; let not my enemies exult over me.
psyc
Indeed, none who wait for you will be put to shame; they will be ashamed who are wantonly treacherous.
psyd
Make me to know your ways, O Lord; teach me your paths.
psye
Lead me in your truth and teach me, for you are the God of my salvation; for you I wait all the day long.
psyf
Remember your mercy, O Lord, and your steadfast love, for they have been from of old.
psyg
Remember not the sins of my youth or my transgressions; according to your steadfast love remember me, for the sake of your goodness, O Lord!
psyh
Good and upright is the Lord; therefore he instructs sinners in the way.
psyi
He leads the humble in what is right, and teaches the humble his way.
psyj
All the paths of the Lord are steadfast love and faithfulness, for those who keep his covenant and his testimonies.
psyk
For your name's sake, O Lord, pardon my guilt, for it is great.
psyl
Who is the man who fears the Lord? Him will he instruct in the way that he should choose.
psym
His soul will abide in well-being, and his offspring will inherit the land.
psyn
The friendship of the Lord is for those who fear him, and he makes known to them his covenant.
psyo
My eyes are ever toward the Lord, for he will pluck my feet out of the net.
psyp
Turn to me and be gracious to me, for I am lonely and afflicted.
psyq
The troubles of my heart are enlarged; bring me out of my distresses.
psyr
Consider my affliction and my trouble, and forgive all my sins.
psys
Consider how many are my foes, and with what violent hatred they hate me.
psyt
Oh, guard my soul, and deliver me! Let me not be put to shame, for I take refuge in you.
psyu
May integrity and uprightness preserve me, for I wait for you.
psyv
Redeem Israel, O God, out of all his troubles.
jfj
Finally, be strong in the Lord and in the strength of his might.
jfk
Put on the whole armour of God, that you may be able to stand against the schemes of the devil.
jfl
For we do not wrestle against flesh and blood, but against the rulers, against the authorities, against the cosmic powers over this present darkness, against the spiritual forces of evil in the heavenly places.
jfm
Therefore take up the whole armour of God, that you may be able to withstand in the evil day, and having done all, to stand firm.
jfn
Stand therefore, having fastened on the belt of truth, and having put on the breastplate of righteousness,
jfo
and, as shoes for your feet, having put on the readiness given by the gospel of peace.
jfp
In all circumstances take up the shield of faith, with which you can extinguish all the flaming darts of the evil one;
jfq
and take the helmet of salvation, and the sword of the Spirit, which is the word of God,
jfr
praying at all times in the Spirit, with all prayer and supplication. To that end, keep alert with all perseverance, making supplication for all the saints,
jfs
and also for me, that words may be given to me in opening my mouth boldly to proclaim the mystery of the gospel,
jft
for which I am an ambassador in chains, that I may declare it boldly, as I ought to speak.
tba
My brothers, show no partiality as you hold the faith in our Lord Jesus Christ, the Lord of glory.
tbb
For if a man wearing a gold ring and fine clothing comes into your assembly, and a poor man in shabby clothing also comes in,
tbc
and if you pay attention to the one who wears the fine clothing and say, "You sit here in a good place", while you say to the poor man, "You stand over there", or, "Sit down at my feet",
tbd
have you not then made distinctions among yourselves and become judges with evil thoughts?
tbe
Listen, my beloved brothers, has not God chosen those who are poor in the world to be rich in faith and heirs of the kingdom, which he has promised to those who love him?
tbf
But you have dishonoured the poor man. Are not the rich the ones who oppress you, and the ones who drag you into court?
tbg
Are they not the ones who blaspheme the honourable name by which you were called?
tbh
If you really fulfil the royal law according to the Scripture, "You shall love your neighbour as yourself", you are doing well.
tbi
But if you show partiality, you are committing sin and are convicted by the law as transgressors.
tbj
For whoever keeps the whole law but fails in one point has become accountable for all of it.
tbk
For he who said, "Do not commit adultery", also said, "Do not murder." If you do not commit adultery but do murder, you have become a transgressor of the law.
tbl
So speak and so act as those who are to be judged under the law of liberty.
tbm
For judgement is without mercy to one who has shown no mercy. Mercy triumphs over judgement.
tbn
What good is it, my brothers, if someone says he has faith but does not have works? Can that faith save him?
tbo
If a brother or sister is poorly clothed and lacking in daily food,
tbp
and one of you says to them, "Go in peace, be warmed and filled", without giving them the things needed for the body, what good is that?
tbq
So also faith by itself, if it does not have works, is dead.
tbr
But someone will say, "You have faith and I have works." Show me your faith apart from your works, and I will show you my faith by my works.
tbs
You believe that God is one; you do well. Even the demons believe - and shudder!
tbt
Do you want to be shown, you foolish person, that faith apart from works is useless?
tbu
Was not Abraham our father justified by works when he offered up his son Isaac on the altar?
tbv
You see that faith was active along with his works, and faith was completed by his works;
tbw
and the Scripture was fulfilled that says, "Abraham believed God, and it was counted to him as righteousness" - and he was called a friend of God.
tbx
You see that a person is justified by works and not by faith alone.
tby
And in the same way was not also Rahab the prostitute justified by works when she received the messengers and sent them out by another way?
tbz
For as the body apart from the spirit is dead, so also faith apart from works is dead.
aga
Judge not, that you be not judged.
agb
For with the judgement you pronounce you will be judged, and with the measure you use it will be measured to you.
agc
Why do you see the speck that is in your brother's eye, but do not notice the log that is in your own eye?
agd
Or how can you say to your brother, "Let me take the speck out of your eye", when there is the log in your own eye?
age
You hypocrite, first take the log out of your own eye, and then you will see clearly to take the speck out of your brother's eye.
agf
Do not give dogs what is holy, and do not throw your pearls before pigs, lest they trample them underfoot and turn to attack you.
agg
Ask, and it will be given to you; seek, and you will find; knock, and it will be opened to you.
agh
For everyone who asks receives, and the one who seeks finds, and to the one who knocks it will be opened.
agi
Or which one of you, if his son asks him for bread, will give him a stone?
agj
Or if he asks for a fish, will give him a serpent?
agk
If you then, who are evil, know how to give good gifts to your children, how much more will your Father who is in heaven give good things to those who ask him!
agl
So whatever you wish that others would do to you, do also to them, for this is the Law and the Prophets.
agm
Enter by the narrow gate. For the gate is wide and the way is easy that leads to destruction, and those who enter by it are many.
agn
For the gate is narrow and the way is hard that leads to life, and those who find it are few.
ago
Beware of false prophets, who come to you in sheep's clothing but inwardly are ravenous wolves.
agp
You will recognize them by their fruits. Are grapes gathered from thorn bushes, or figs from thistles?
agq
So, every healthy tree bears good fruit, but the diseased tree bears bad fruit.
agr
A healthy tree cannot bear bad fruit, nor can a diseased tree bear good fruit.
ags
Every tree that does not bear good fruit is cut down and thrown into the fire.
agt
Thus you will recognize them by their fruits.
agu
Not everyone who says to me, "Lord, Lord", will enter the kingdom of heaven, but the one who does the will of my Father who is in heaven.
agv
On that day many will say to me, "Lord, Lord, did we not prophesy in your name, and cast out demons in your name, and do many mighty works in your name?"
agw
And then will I declare to them, "I never knew you; depart from me, you workers of lawlessness."
agx
Everyone then who hears these words of mine and does them will be like a wise man who built his house on the rock.
agy
And the rain fell, and the floods came, and the winds blew and beat on that house, but it did not fall, because it had been founded on the rock.
agz
And everyone who hears these words of mine and does not do them will be like a foolish man who built his house on the sand.
agç
And the rain fell, and the floods came, and the winds blew and beat against that house, and it fell, and great was the fall of it.
agş
And when Jesus finished these sayings, the crowds were astonished at his teaching,
agö
for he was teaching them as one who had authority, and not as their scribes.
tca
Not many of you should become teachers, my brothers, for you know that we who teach will be judged with greater strictness.
tcb
For we all stumble in many ways. And if anyone does not stumble in what he says, he is a perfect man, able also to bridle his whole body.
tcc
If we put bits into the mouths of horses so that they obey us, we guide their whole bodies as well.
tcd
Look at the ships also: though they are so large and are driven by strong winds, they are guided by a very small rudder wherever the will of the pilot directs.
tce
So also the tongue is a small member, yet it boasts of great things. How great a forest is set ablaze by such a small fire!
tcf
And the tongue is a fire, a world of unrighteousness. The tongue is set among our members, staining the whole body, setting on fire the entire course of life, and set on fire by hell.
tcg
For every kind of beast and bird, of reptile and sea creature, can be tamed and has been tamed by mankind,
tch
but no human being can tame the tongue. It is a restless evil, full of deadly poison.
tci
With it we bless our Lord and Father, and with it we curse people who are made in the likeness of God.
tcj
From the same mouth come blessing and cursing. My brothers, these things ought not to be so.
tck
Does a spring pour forth from the same opening both fresh and salt water?
tcl
Can a fig tree, my brothers, bear olives, or a grapevine produce figs? Neither can a salt pond yield fresh water.
tcm
Who is wise and understanding among you? By his good conduct let him show his works in the meekness of wisdom.
tcn
But if you have bitter jealousy and selfish ambition in your hearts, do not boast and be false to the truth.
tco
This is not the wisdom that comes down from above, but is earthly, unspiritual, demonic.
tcp
For where jealousy and selfish ambition exist, there will be disorder and every vile practice.
tcq
But the wisdom from above is first pure, then peaceable, gentle, open to reason, full of mercy and good fruits, impartial and sincere.
tcr
And a harvest of righteousness is sown in peace by those who make peace.
aha
When he came down from the mountain, great crowds followed him.
ahb
And behold, a leper came to him and knelt before him, saying, "Lord, if you will, you can make me clean."
ahc
And Jesus stretched out his hand and touched him, saying, "I will; be clean." And immediately his leprosy was cleansed.
ahd
And Jesus said to him, "See that you say nothing to anyone, but go, show yourself to the priest and offer the gift that Moses commanded, for a proof to them."
ahe
When he had entered Capernaum, a centurion came forward to him, appealing to him,
ahf
"Lord, my servant is lying paralysed at home, suffering terribly."
ahg
And he said to him, "I will come and heal him."
ahh
But the centurion replied, "Lord, I am not worthy to have you come under my roof, but only say the word, and my servant will be healed.
ahi
For I too am a man under authority, with soldiers under me. And I say to one, "Go", and he goes, and to another, "Come", and he comes, and to my servant, "Do this", and he does it."
ahj
When Jesus heard this, he marvelled and said to those who followed him, "Truly, I tell you, with no one in Israel have I found such faith.
ahk
I tell you, many will come from east and west and recline at table with Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob in the kingdom of heaven,
ahl
while the sons of the kingdom will be thrown into the outer darkness. In that place there will be weeping and gnashing of teeth."
ahm
And to the centurion Jesus said, "Go; let it be done for you as you have believed." And the servant was healed at that very moment.
ahn
And when Jesus entered Peter's house, he saw his mother-in-law lying sick with a fever.
aho
He touched her hand, and the fever left her, and she rose and began to serve him.
ahp
That evening they brought to him many who were oppressed by demons, and he cast out the spirits with a word and healed all who were sick.
ahq
This was to fulfil what was spoken by the prophet Isaiah: "He took our illnesses and bore our diseases."
ahr
Now when Jesus saw a crowd around him, he gave orders to go over to the other side.
ahs
And a scribe came up and said to him, "Teacher, I will follow you wherever you go."
aht
And Jesus said to him, "Foxes have holes, and birds of the air have nests, but the Son of Man has nowhere to lay his head."
ahu
Another of the disciples said to him, "Lord, let me first go and bury my father."
ahv
And Jesus said to him, "Follow me, and leave the dead to bury their own dead."
ahw
And when he got into the boat, his disciples followed him.
ahx
And behold, there arose a great storm on the sea, so that the boat was being swamped by the waves; but he was asleep.
ahy
And they went and woke him, saying, "Save us, Lord; we are perishing."
ahz
And he said to them, "Why are you afraid, O you of little faith?" Then he rose and rebuked the winds and the sea, and there was a great calm.
ahç
And the men marvelled, saying, "What sort of man is this, that even winds and sea obey him?"
ahş
And when he came to the other side, to the country of the Gadarenes, two demon-possessed men met him, coming out of the tombs, so fierce that no one could pass that way.
ahö
And behold, they cried out, "What have you to do with us, O Son of God? Have you come here to torment us before the time?"
ahü
Now a herd of many pigs was feeding at some distance from them.
ahA
And the demons begged him, saying, "If you cast us out, send us away into the herd of pigs."
ahB
And he said to them, "Go." So they came out and went into the pigs, and behold, the whole herd rushed down the steep bank into the sea and drowned in the waters.
ahC
The herdsmen fled, and going into the city they told everything, especially what had happened to the demon-possessed men.
ahD
And behold, all the city came out to meet Jesus, and when they saw him, they begged him to leave their region.
ps67a
May God be gracious to us and bless us and make his face to shine upon us, Selah
ps67b
that your way may be known on earth, your saving power among all nations.
ps67c
Let the peoples praise you, O God; let all the peoples praise you!
ps67d
Let the nations be glad and sing for joy, for you judge the peoples with equity and guide the nations upon earth. Selah
ps67e
Let the peoples praise you, O God; let all the peoples praise you!
ps67f
The earth has yielded its increase; God, our God, will bless us.
ps67g
God will bless us; let all the ends of the earth fear him!
tda
What causes quarrels and what causes fights among you? Is it not this, that your passions are at war within you?
tdb
You desire and do not have, so you murder. You covet and cannot obtain, so you fight and quarrel.
tdc
You do not have, because you do not ask. You ask and do not receive, because you ask wrongly, to spend it on your passions.
tdd
You adulterous people! Do you not know that friendship with the world is enmity with God? Therefore whoever wishes to be a friend of the world makes himself an enemy of God.
tde
Or do you suppose it is to no purpose that the Scripture says, "He yearns jealously over the spirit that he has made to dwell in us"?
tdf
But he gives more grace. Therefore it says, "God opposes the proud, but gives grace to the humble."
tdg
Submit yourselves therefore to God. Resist the devil, and he will flee from you.
tdh
Draw near to God, and he will draw near to you. Cleanse your hands, you sinners, and purify your hearts, you double-minded.
tdi
Be wretched and mourn and weep. Let your laughter be turned to mourning and your joy to gloom.
tdj
Humble yourselves before the Lord, and he will exalt you.
tdk
Do not speak evil against one another, brothers. The one who speaks against a brother or judges his brother, speaks evil against the law and judges the law. But if you judge the law, you are not a doer of the law but a judge.
tdl
There is only one lawgiver and judge, he who is able to save and to destroy. But who are you to judge your neighbour?
tdm
Come now, you who say, "Today or tomorrow we will go into such and such a town and spend a year there and trade and make a profit" -
tdn
yet you do not know what tomorrow will bring. What is your life? For you are a mist that appears for a little time and then vanishes.
tdo
Instead you ought to say, "If the Lord wills, we will live and do this or that."
tdp
As it is, you boast in your arrogance. All such boasting is evil.
tdq
So whoever knows the right thing to do and fails to do it, for him it is sin.
aia
And getting into a boat he crossed over and came to his own city.
aib
And behold, some people brought to him a paralytic, lying on a bed. And when Jesus saw their faith, he said to the paralytic, "Take heart, my son; your sins are forgiven."
aic
And behold, some of the scribes said to themselves, "This man is blaspheming."
aid
But Jesus, knowing their thoughts, said, "Why do you think evil in your hearts?
aie
For which is easier, to say, "Your sins are forgiven", or to say, "Rise and walk"?
aif
But that you may know that the Son of Man has authority on earth to forgive sins" - he then said to the paralytic - "Rise, pick up your bed and go home."
aig
And he rose and went home.
aih
When the crowds saw it, they were afraid, and they glorified God, who had given such authority to men.
aii
As Jesus passed on from there, he saw a man called Matthew sitting at the tax booth, and he said to him, "Follow me." And he rose and followed him.
aij
And as Jesus reclined at table in the house, behold, many tax collectors and sinners came and were reclining with Jesus and his disciples.
aik
And when the Pharisees saw this, they said to his disciples, "Why does your teacher eat with tax collectors and sinners?"
ail
But when he heard it, he said, "Those who are well have no need of a physician, but those who are sick.
aim
Go and learn what this means, "I desire mercy, and not sacrifice." For I came not to call the righteous, but sinners."
ain
Then the disciples of John came to him, saying, "Why do we and the Pharisees fast, but your disciples do not fast?"
aio
And Jesus said to them, "Can the wedding guests mourn as long as the bridegroom is with them? The days will come when the bridegroom is taken away from them, and then they will fast.
aip
No one puts a piece of unshrunk cloth on an old garment, for the patch tears away from the garment, and a worse tear is made.
aiq
Neither is new wine put into old wineskins. If it is, the skins burst and the wine is spilled and the skins are destroyed. But new wine is put into fresh wineskins, and so both are preserved."
air
While he was saying these things to them, behold, a ruler came in and knelt before him, saying, "My daughter has just died, but come and lay your hand on her, and she will live."
ais
And Jesus rose and followed him, with his disciples.
ait
And behold, a woman who had suffered from a discharge of blood for twelve years came up behind him and touched the fringe of his garment,
aiu
for she said to herself, "If I only touch his garment, I will be made well."
aiv
Jesus turned, and seeing her he said, "Take heart, daughter; your faith has made you well." And instantly the woman was made well.
aiw
And when Jesus came to the ruler's house and saw the flute players and the crowd making a commotion,
aix
he said, "Go away, for the girl is not dead but sleeping." And they laughed at him.
aiy
But when the crowd had been put outside, he went in and took her by the hand, and the girl arose.
aiz
And the report of this went through all that district.
aiç
And as Jesus passed on from there, two blind men followed him, crying aloud, "Have mercy on us, Son of David."
aiş
When he entered the house, the blind men came to him, and Jesus said to them, "Do you believe that I am able to do this?" They said to him, "Yes, Lord."
aiö
Then he touched their eyes, saying, "According to your faith be it done to you."
aiü
And their eyes were opened. And Jesus sternly warned them, "See that no one knows about it."
aiA
But they went away and spread his fame through all that district.
aiB
As they were going away, behold, a demon-oppressed man who was mute was brought to him.
aiC
And when the demon had been cast out, the mute man spoke. And the crowds marvelled, saying, "Never was anything like this seen in Israel."
aiD
But the Pharisees said, "He casts out demons by the prince of demons."
aiE
And Jesus went throughout all the cities and villages, teaching in their synagogues and proclaiming the gospel of the kingdom and healing every disease and every affliction.
aiF
When he saw the crowds, he had compassion for them, because they were harassed and helpless, like sheep without a shepherd.
aiG
Then he said to his disciples, "The harvest is plentiful, but the labourers are few;
aiH
therefore pray earnestly to the Lord of the harvest to send out labourers into his harvest."
tea
Come now, you rich, weep and howl for the miseries that are coming upon you.
teb
Your riches have rotted and your garments are moth-eaten.
tec
Your gold and silver have corroded, and their corrosion will be evidence against you and will eat your flesh like fire. You have laid up treasure in the last days.
ted
Behold, the wages of the labourers who mowed your fields, which you kept back by fraud, are crying out against you, and the cries of the harvesters have reached the ears of the Lord of hosts.
tee
You have lived on the earth in luxury and in self-indulgence. You have fattened your hearts in a day of slaughter.
tef
You have condemned and murdered the righteous person. He does not resist you.
teg
Be patient, therefore, brothers, until the coming of the Lord. See how the farmer waits for the precious fruit of the earth, being patient about it, until it receives the early and the late rains.
teh
You also, be patient. Establish your hearts, for the coming of the Lord is at hand.
tei
Do not grumble against one another, brothers, so that you may not be judged; behold, the Judge is standing at the door.
tej
As an example of suffering and patience, brothers, take the prophets who spoke in the name of the Lord.
tek
Behold, we consider those blessed who remained steadfast. You have heard of the steadfastness of Job, and you have seen the purpose of the Lord, how the Lord is compassionate and merciful.
tel
But above all, my brothers, do not swear, either by heaven or by earth or by any other oath, but let your "yes" be yes and your "no" be no, so that you may not fall under condemnation.
tem
Is anyone among you suffering? Let him pray. Is anyone cheerful? Let him sing praise.
ten
Is anyone among you sick? Let him call for the elders of the church, and let them pray over him, anointing him with oil in the name of the Lord.
teo
And the prayer of faith will save the one who is sick, and the Lord will raise him up. And if he has committed sins, he will be forgiven.
tep
Therefore, confess your sins to one another and pray for one another, that you may be healed. The prayer of a righteous person has great power as it is working.
teq
Elijah was a man with a nature like ours, and he prayed fervently that it might not rain, and for three years and six months it did not rain on the earth.
ter
Then he prayed again, and heaven gave rain, and the earth bore its fruit.
tes
My brothers, if anyone among you wanders from the truth and someone brings him back,
tet
let him know that whoever brings back a sinner from his wandering will save his soul from death and will cover a multitude of sins.
gfr
Flee from sexual immorality. Every other sin a person commits is outside the body, but the sexually immoral person sins against his own body.
gfs
Or do you not know that your body is a temple of the Holy Spirit within you, whom you have from God?
gft
You are not your own, for you were bought with a price. So glorify God in your body.
prcg
Be not wise in your own eyes; fear the Lord, and turn away from evil.
prsq
Whoever is generous to the poor lends to the Lord, and he will repay him for his deed.
ibt
I have been crucified with Christ. It is no longer I who live, but Christ who lives in me. And the life I now live in the flesh I live by faith in the Son of God, who loved me and gave himself for me.
dmD
A new commandment I give to you, that you love one another: just as I have loved you, you also are to love one another.
scl
Take care, brothers, lest there be in any of you an evil, unbelieving heart, leading you to fall away from the living God.
scm
But exhort one another every day, as long as it is called "today", that none of you may be hardened by the deceitfulness of sin.
scn
For we have come to share in Christ, if indeed we hold our original confidence firm to the end.
cjH
Now as they went on their way, Jesus entered a village. And a woman named Martha welcomed him into her house.
cjI
And she had a sister called Mary, who sat at the Lord's feet and listened to his teaching.
cjJ
But Martha was distracted with much serving. And she went up to him and said, "Lord, do you not care that my sister has left me to serve alone? Tell her then to help me."
cjK
But the Lord answered her, "Martha, Martha, you are anxious and troubled about many things, but one thing is necessary.
cjL
Mary has chosen the good portion, which will not be taken away from her."
isMaa
But now thus says the Lord, he who created you, O Jacob, he who formed you, O Israel:
isMab
Fear not, for I have redeemed you; I have called you by name, you are mine.
isMba
When you pass through the waters, I will be with you; and through the rivers, they will not overwhelm you;
isMbb
when you walk through fire you will not be burned, and the flame will not consume you.
isMca
For I am the Lord your God, the Holy One of Israel, your Saviour.
isMcb
I give Egypt as your ransom, Cush and Seba in exchange for you.
isMda
Because you are precious in my eyes, and honoured, and I love you,
isMdb
I give men in return for you, peoples in exchange for your life.
genaa
In the beginning, God created the heavens and the earth.
genab
The earth was without form and void, and darkness was over the face of the deep. And the Spirit of God was hovering over the face of the waters.
genac
And God said, "Let there be light", and there was light.
genad
And God saw that the light was good. And God separated the light from the darkness.
genae
God called the light Day, and the darkness he called Night. And there was evening and there was morning, the first day.
genaf
And God said, "Let there be an expanse in the midst of the waters, and let it separate the waters from the waters."
genag
And God made the expanse and separated the waters that were under the expanse from the waters that were above the expanse. And it was so.
genah
God called the expanse Heaven. And there was evening and there was morning, the second day.
genai
And God said, "Let the waters under the heavens be gathered together into one place, and let the dry land appear." And it was so.
genaj
God called the dry land Earth, and the waters that were gathered together he called Seas. And God saw that it was good.
genak
And God said, "Let the earth sprout vegetation, plants yielding seed, and fruit trees bearing fruit in which is their seed, each according to its kind, on the earth." And it was so.
genal
The earth brought forth vegetation, plants yielding seed according to their own kinds, and trees bearing fruit in which is their seed, each according to its kind. And God saw that it was good.
genam
And there was evening and there was morning, the third day.
genan
And God said, "Let there be lights in the expanse of the heavens to separate the day from the night. And let them be for signs and for seasons, and for days and years,
genao
and let them be lights in the expanse of the heavens to give light upon the earth." And it was so.
genap
And God made the two great lights - the greater light to rule the day and the lesser light to rule the night - and the stars.
genaq
And God set them in the expanse of the heavens to give light on the earth,
genar
to rule over the day and over the night, and to separate the light from the darkness. And God saw that it was good.
genas
And there was evening and there was morning, the fourth day.
genat
And God said, "Let the waters swarm with swarms of living creatures, and let birds fly above the earth across the expanse of the heavens."
genau
So God created the great sea creatures and every living creature that moves, with which the waters swarm, according to their kinds, and every winged bird according to its kind. And God saw that it was good.
genav
And God blessed them, saying, "Be fruitful and multiply and fill the waters in the seas, and let birds multiply on the earth."
genaw
And there was evening and there was morning, the fifth day.
genax
And God said, "Let the earth bring forth living creatures according to their kinds - livestock and creeping things and beasts of the earth according to their kinds." And it was so.
genay
And God made the beasts of the earth according to their kinds and the livestock according to their kinds, and everything that creeps on the ground according to its kind. And God saw that it was good.
genaz
Then God said, "Let us make man in our image, after our likeness. And let them have dominion over the fish of the sea and over the birds of the heavens and over the livestock and over all the earth and over every creeping thing that creeps on the earth."
genaç
So God created man in his own image, in the image of God he created him; male and female he created them.
genaş
And God blessed them. And God said to them, "Be fruitful and multiply and fill the earth and subdue it and have dominion over the fish of the sea and over the birds of the heavens and over every living thing that moves on the earth."
genaö
And God said, "Behold, I have given you every plant yielding seed that is on the face of all the earth, and every tree with seed in its fruit. You shall have them for food.
genaü
And to every beast of the earth and to every bird of the heavens and to everything that creeps on the earth, everything that has the breath of life, I have given every green plant for food." And it was so.
genaA
And God saw everything that he had made, and behold, it was very good. And there was evening and there was morning, the sixth day.
genba
Thus the heavens and the earth were finished, and all the host of them.
genbb
And on the seventh day God finished his work that he had done, and he rested on the seventh day from all his work that he had done.
genbc
So God blessed the seventh day and made it holy, because on it God rested from all his work that he had done in creation.
revaa
The revelation of Jesus Christ, which God gave him to show to his servants the things that must soon take place.
revab
He made it known by sending his angel to his servant John,
revac
who bore witness to the word of God and to the testimony of Jesus Christ, even to all that he saw.
revad
Blessed is the one who reads aloud the words of this prophecy,
revae
and blessed are those who hear, and who keep what is written in it, for the time is near.
revaf
John to the seven churches that are in Asia: Grace to you and peace from him who is and who was and who is to come,
revag
and from the seven spirits who are before his throne,
revah
and from Jesus Christ the faithful witness, the firstborn of the dead, and the ruler of kings on earth.
revai
To him who loves us and has freed us from our sins by his blood
revaj
and made us a kingdom, priests to his God and Father,
revak
to him be glory and dominion forever and ever. Amen.
reval
Behold, he is coming with the clouds, and every eye will see him, even those who pierced him,
revam
and all tribes of the earth will wail on account of him. Even so. Amen.
revan
"I am the Alpha and the Omega", says the Lord God, "who is and who was and who is to come, the Almighty."
revao
I, John, your brother and partner in the tribulation and the kingdom and the patient endurance that are in Jesus,
revap
was on the island called Patmos on account of the word of God and the testimony of Jesus.
revaq
I was in the Spirit on the Lord's day, and I heard behind me a loud voice like a trumpet saying,
revar
"Write what you see in a book and send it to the seven churches, to Ephesus and to Smyrna and to Pergamum and to Thyatira and to Sardis and to Philadelphia and to Laodicea."
revas
Then I turned to see the voice that was speaking to me, and on turning I saw seven golden lampstands,
revat
and in the midst of the lampstands one like a son of man, clothed with a long robe and with a golden sash round his chest.
revau
The hairs of his head were white, like white wool, like snow.
revav
His eyes were like a flame of fire,
revaw
his feet were like burnished bronze, refined in a furnace,
revax
and his voice was like the roar of many waters.
revay
In his right hand he held seven stars,
revaz
from his mouth came a sharp two-edged sword,
revaç
and his face was like the sun shining in full strength.
revaş
When I saw him, I fell at his feet as though dead. But he laid his right hand on me, saying, 
revaö
Fear not, I am the first and the last, and the living one.
revaü
I died, and behold I am alive for evermore, and I have the keys of Death and Hades.
revaA
Write therefore the things that you have seen, those that are and those that are to take place after this.
revaB
As for the mystery of the seven stars that you saw in my right hand, and the seven golden lampstands,
revaC
the seven stars are the angels of the seven churches, and the seven lampstands are the seven churches.
aja
And he called to him his twelve disciples and gave them authority over unclean spirits, to cast them out, and to heal every disease and every affliction.
ajb
The names of the twelve apostles are these: first, Simon, who is called Peter, and Andrew his brother;
ajc
James the son of Zebedee, and John his brother; Philip and Bartholomew; Thomas and Matthew the tax collector;
ajd
James the son of Alphaeus, and Thaddaeus; Simon the Cananaean, and Judas Iscariot, who betrayed him.
aje
These twelve Jesus sent out, instructing them, "Go nowhere among the Gentiles and enter no town of the Samaritans,
ajf
but go rather to the lost sheep of the house of Israel.
ajg
And proclaim as you go, saying, "The kingdom of heaven is at hand."
ajh
Heal the sick, raise the dead, cleanse lepers, cast out demons.
aji
You received without paying; give without pay.
ajj
Acquire no gold nor silver nor copper for your belts, no bag for your journey, nor two tunics nor sandals nor a staff,
ajk
for the labourer deserves his food.
ajl
And whatever town or village you enter, find out who is worthy in it and stay there until you depart.
ajm
As you enter the house, greet it.
ajn
And if the house is worthy, let your peace come upon it, but if it is not worthy, let your peace return to you.
ajo
And if anyone will not receive you or listen to your words, shake off the dust from your feet when you leave that house or town.
ajp
Truly, I say to you, it will be more bearable on the day of judgement for the land of Sodom and Gomorrah than for that town.
ajq
Behold, I am sending you out as sheep in the midst of wolves,
ajr
so be wise as serpents and innocent as doves.
ajs
Beware of men, for they will deliver you over to courts and flog you in their synagogues,
ajt
and you will be dragged before governors and kings for my sake, to bear witness before them and the Gentiles.
aju
When they deliver you over, do not be anxious how you are to speak or what you are to say, for what you are to say will be given to you in that hour.
ajv
For it is not you who speak, but the Spirit of your Father speaking through you.
ajw
Brother will deliver brother over to death, and the father his child, and children will rise against parents and have them put to death,
ajx
and you will be hated by all for my name's sake.
ajy
But the one who endures to the end will be saved.
ajz
When they persecute you in one town, flee to the next, for truly, I say to you, you will not have gone through all the towns of Israel before the Son of Man comes.
ajç
A disciple is not above his teacher, nor a servant above his master.
ajş
It is enough for the disciple to be like his teacher, and the servant like his master.
ajö
If they have called the master of the house Beelzebul, how much more will they malign those of his household.
ajü
So have no fear of them,
ajA
for nothing is covered that will not be revealed, or hidden that will not be known.
ajB
What I tell you in the dark, say in the light, and what you hear whispered, proclaim on the housetops.
ajC
And do not fear those who kill the body but cannot kill the soul.
ajD
Rather fear him who can destroy both soul and body in hell.
ajE
Are not two sparrows sold for a penny?
ajF
And not one of them will fall to the ground apart from your Father.
ajG
But even the hairs of your head are all numbered.
ajH
Fear not, therefore; you are of more value than many sparrows.
ajI
So everyone who acknowledges me before men, I also will acknowledge before my Father who is in heaven,
ajJ
but whoever denies me before men, I also will deny before my Father who is in heaven.
ajK
Do not think that I have come to bring peace to the earth. I have not come to bring peace, but a sword.
ajL
For I have come to set a man against his father, and a daughter against her mother, and a daughter-in-law against her mother-in-law.
ajM
And a person's enemies will be those of his own household.
ajN
Whoever loves father or mother more than me is not worthy of me, and whoever loves son or daughter more than me is not worthy of me.
ajO
And whoever does not take his cross and follow me is not worthy of me.
ajP
Whoever finds his life will lose it, and whoever loses his life for my sake will find it.
ajQ
Whoever receives you receives me, and whoever receives me receives him who sent me.
ajR
The one who receives a prophet because he is a prophet will receive a prophet's reward,
ajS
and the one who receives a righteous person because he is a righteous person will receive a righteous person's reward.
ajT
And whoever gives one of these little ones even a cup of cold water because he is a disciple, truly, I say to you, he will by no means lose his reward."
genaB
Thus the heavens and the earth were finished, and all the host of them.
genaC
And on the seventh day God finished his work that he had done, and he rested on the seventh day from all his work that he had done.
genaD
So God blessed the seventh day and made it holy, because on it God rested from all his work that he had done in creation.
genba
These are the generations of the heavens and the earth when they were created, in the day that the Lord God made the earth and the heavens.
genbb
When no bush of the field was yet in the land and no small plant of the field had yet sprung up -
genbc
for the Lord God had not caused it to rain on the land, and there was no man to work the ground,
genbd
and a mist was going up from the land and was watering the whole face of the ground -
genbe
then the Lord God formed the man of dust from the ground and breathed into his nostrils the breath of life, and the man became a living creature.
genbf
And the Lord God planted a garden in Eden, in the east, and there he put the man whom he had formed.
genbg
And out of the ground the Lord God made to spring up every tree that is pleasant to the sight and good for food.
genbh
The tree of life was in the midst of the garden, and the tree of the knowledge of good and evil.
genbi
A river flowed out of Eden to water the garden, and there it divided and became four rivers.
genbj
The name of the first is the Pishon. It is the one that flowed around the whole land of Havilah, where there is gold.
genbk
And the gold of that land is good; bdellium and onyx stone are there.
genbl
The name of the second river is the Gihon. It is the one that flowed around the whole land of Cush.
genbm
And the name of the third river is the Tigris, which flows east of Assyria.
genbn
And the fourth river is the Euphrates.
genbo
The Lord God took the man and put him in the garden of Eden to work it and keep it.
genbp
And the Lord God commanded the man, saying, "You may surely eat of every tree of the garden,
genbq
but of the tree of the knowledge of good and evil you shall not eat, for in the day that you eat of it you will surely die."
genbr
Then the Lord God said, "It is not good that the man should be alone; I will make him a helper fit for him."
genbs
Now out of the ground the Lord God had formed every beast of the field and every bird of the heavens and brought them to the man to see what he would call them. And whatever the man called every living creature, that was its name.
genbt
The man gave names to all livestock and to the birds of the heavens and to every beast of the field. But for Adam there was not found a helper fit for him.
genbu
So the Lord God caused a deep sleep to fall upon the man, and while he slept took one of his ribs and closed up its place with flesh.
genbv
And the rib that the Lord God had taken from the man he made into a woman and brought her to the man.
genbw
Then the man said, "This at last is bone of my bones and flesh of my flesh; she will be called Woman, because she was taken out of Man."
genbx
Therefore a man shall leave his father and his mother and hold fast to his wife, and they will become one flesh.
genby
And the man and his wife were both naked and were not ashamed.
revba
To the angel of the church in Ephesus write: The words of him who holds the seven stars in his right hand, who walks among the seven golden lampstands.
revbb
I know your works, your toil and your patient endurance,
revbc
and how you cannot bear with those who are evil, but have tested those who call themselves apostles and are not, and found them to be false.
revbd
I know you are enduring patiently and bearing up for my name's sake, and you have not grown weary.
revbe
But I have this against you, that you have abandoned the love you had at first.
revbf
Remember therefore from where you have fallen; repent, and do the works you did at first.
revbg
If not, I will come to you and remove your lampstand from its place, unless you repent.
revbh
Yet you have this: you hate the works of the Nicolaitans, which I also hate.
revbi
He who has an ear, let him hear what the Spirit says to the churches.
revbj
To the one who conquers I will grant to eat of the tree of life, which is in the paradise of God.
revbk
And to the angel of the church in Smyrna write: The words of the first and the last, who died and came to life.
revbl
I know your tribulation and your poverty (but you are rich)
revbm
and the slander of those who say that they are Jews and are not, but are a synagogue of Satan.
revbn
Do not fear what you are about to suffer.
revbo
Behold, the devil is about to throw some of you into prison, that you may be tested, and for ten days you will have tribulation.
revbp
Be faithful unto death, and I will give you the crown of life.
revbq
He who has an ear, let him hear what the Spirit says to the churches.
revbr
The one who conquers will not be hurt by the second death.
revbu
And to the angel of the church in Pergamum write: The words of him who has the sharp two-edged sword.
revbv
I know where you dwell, where Satan's throne is. Yet you hold fast to my name,
revbw
and you did not deny my faith even in the days of Antipas my faithful witness, who was killed among you, where Satan dwells.
revbx
But I have a few things against you: you have some there who hold the teaching of Balaam,
revby
who taught Balak to put a stumbling block before the sons of Israel, so that they might eat food sacrificed to idols and practise sexual immorality.
revbz
So also you have some who hold the teaching of the Nicolaitans.
revbç
Therefore repent. If not, I will come to you soon and war against them with the sword of my mouth.
revbş
He who has an ear, let him hear what the Spirit says to the churches.
revbö
To the one who conquers I will give some of the hidden manna,
revbü
and I will give him a white stone, with a new name written on the stone that no one knows except the one who receives it.
revbA
And to the angel of the church in Thyatira write: The words of the Son of God, who has eyes like a flame of fire, and whose feet are like burnished bronze.
revbB
I know your works, your love and faith and service and patient endurance, and that your latter works exceed the first.
revbC
But I have this against you, that you tolerate that woman Jezebel, who calls herself a prophetess
revbD
and is teaching and seducing my servants to practise sexual immorality and to eat food sacrificed to idols.
revbE
I gave her time to repent, but she refuses to repent of her sexual immorality.
revbF
Behold, I will throw her onto a sickbed,
revbG
and those who commit adultery with her I will throw into great tribulation, unless they repent of her works,
revbH
and I will strike her children dead.
revbI
And all the churches will know that I am he who searches mind and heart,
revbJ
and I will give to each of you according to your works.
revbK
But to the rest of you in Thyatira, who do not hold this teaching, who have not learned what some call the deep things of Satan,
revbL
to you I say, I do not lay on you any other burden.
revbM
Only hold fast to what you have until I come.
revbN
The one who conquers and who keeps my works until the end, to him I will give authority over the nations,
revbO
and he will rule them with a rod of iron, as when earthen pots are broken in pieces,
revbP
even as I myself have received authority from my Father.
revbQ
And I will give him the morning star.
revbR
He who has an ear, let him hear what the Spirit says to the churches.
aka
When Jesus had finished instructing his twelve disciples, he went on from there to teach and preach in their cities.
akb
Now when John heard in prison about the deeds of the Christ, he sent word by his disciples and said to him,
akc
"Are you the one who is to come, or should we look for another?"
akd
And Jesus answered them, "Go and tell John what you hear and see:
ake
the blind receive their sight and the lame walk, lepers are cleansed and the deaf hear, and the dead are raised up, and the poor have good news preached to them.
akf
And blessed is the one who is not offended by me."
akg
As they went away, Jesus began to speak to the crowds concerning John: "What did you go out into the wilderness to see? A reed shaken by the wind?
akh
What then did you go out to see? A man dressed in soft clothing? Behold, those who wear soft clothing are in kings' houses.
aki
What then did you go out to see? A prophet? Yes, I tell you, and more than a prophet.
akj
This is he of whom it is written, "Behold, I send my messenger before your face, who will prepare your way before you."
akk
Truly, I say to you, among those born of women there has arisen no one greater than John the Baptist. Yet the one who is least in the kingdom of heaven is greater than he.
akl
From the days of John the Baptist until now the kingdom of heaven has suffered violence, and the violent take it by force.
akm
For all the Prophets and the Law prophesied until John,
akn
and if you are willing to accept it, he is Elijah who is to come.
ako
He who has ears to hear, let him hear.
akp
But to what shall I compare this generation? It is like children sitting in the market-places and calling to their playmates,
akq
"We played the flute for you, and you did not dance; we sang a dirge, and you did not mourn."
akr
For John came neither eating nor drinking, and they say, "He has a demon."
aks
The Son of Man came eating and drinking, and they say, "Look at him! A glutton and a drunkard, a friend of tax collectors and sinners!"
akt
Yet wisdom is justified by her deeds."
aku
Then he began to denounce the cities where most of his mighty works had been done, because they did not repent.
akv
"Woe to you, Chorazin! Woe to you, Bethsaida!
akw
For if the mighty works done in you had been done in Tyre and Sidon, they would have repented long ago in sackcloth and ashes.
akx
But I tell you, it will be more bearable on the day of judgement for Tyre and Sidon than for you.
aky
And you, Capernaum, will you be exalted to heaven? You will be brought down to Hades.
akz
For if the mighty works done in you had been done in Sodom, it would have remained until this day.
akç
But I tell you, it will be more bearable on the day of judgement for the land of Sodom than for you.
akş
At that time Jesus declared, "I thank you, Father, Lord of heaven and earth,
akö
that you have hidden these things from the wise and understanding and revealed them to little children;
akü
yes, Father, for such was your gracious will.
akA
All things have been handed over to me by my Father,
akB
and no one knows the Son except the Father,
akC
and no one knows the Father except the Son and anyone to whom the Son chooses to reveal him.
akD
Come to me, all who labour and are heavy laden, and I will give you rest.
akE
Take my yoke upon you, and learn from me,
akF
for I am gentle and lowly in heart, and you will find rest for your souls.
akG
For my yoke is easy, and my burden is light.
genca
Now the serpent was more crafty than any other beast of the field that the Lord God had made.
gencb
He said to the woman, "Did God actually say, "You shall not eat of any tree in the garden"?"
gencc
And the woman said to the serpent, "We may eat of the fruit of the trees in the garden,
gencd
but God said, "You shall not eat of the fruit of the tree that is in the midst of the garden, neither shall you touch it, lest you die."
gence
But the serpent said to the woman, "You will not surely die.
gencf
For God knows that when you eat of it your eyes will be opened, and you will be like God, knowing good and evil."
gencg
So when the woman saw that the tree was good for food, and that it was a delight to the eyes, and that the tree was to be desired to make one wise,
gench
she took of its fruit and ate, and she also gave some to her husband who was with her, and he ate.
genci
Then the eyes of both were opened, and they knew that they were naked.
gencj
And they sewed fig leaves together and made themselves loincloths.
genck
And they heard the sound of the Lord God walking in the garden in the cool of the day,
gencl
and the man and his wife hid themselves from the presence of the Lord God among the trees of the garden.
gencm
But the Lord God called to the man and said to him, "Where are you?"
gencn
And he said, "I heard the sound of you in the garden, and I was afraid, because I was naked, and I hid myself."
genco
He said, "Who told you that you were naked? Have you eaten of the tree of which I commanded you not to eat?"
gencp
The man said, "The woman whom you gave to be with me, she gave me fruit of the tree, and I ate."
gencq
Then the Lord God said to the woman, "What is this that you have done?"
gencr
The woman said, "The serpent deceived me, and I ate."
gencs
The Lord God said to the serpent, "Because you have done this, cursed are you above all livestock and above all beasts of the field;
genct
on your belly you will go, and dust you will eat all the days of your life.
gencu
I will put enmity between you and the woman, and between your offspring and her offspring; he will bruise your head, and you will bruise his heel."
gencv
To the woman he said, "I will surely multiply your pain in childbearing; in pain you will bring forth children.
gencw
Your desire will be for your husband, but he will rule over you."
gencx
And to Adam he said, "Because you have listened to the voice of your wife and have eaten of the tree of which I commanded you, "You shall not eat of it",
gency
cursed is the ground because of you; in pain you will eat of it all the days of your life;
gencz
thorns and thistles it will bring forth for you; and you will eat the plants of the field.
gencç
By the sweat of your face you will eat bread, till you return to the ground,
gencş
for out of it you were taken; for you are dust, and to dust you will return."
gencö
The man called his wife's name Eve, because she was the mother of all living.
gencü
And the Lord God made for Adam and for his wife garments of skins and clothed them.
gencA
Then the Lord God said, "Behold, the man has become like one of us in knowing good and evil.
gencB
Now, lest he reach out his hand and take also of the tree of life and eat, and live forever—"
gencC
therefore the Lord God sent him out from the garden of Eden to work the ground from which he was taken.
gencD
He drove out the man, and at the east of the garden of Eden he placed the cherubim and a flaming sword that turned every way to guard the way to the tree of life.
revca
And to the angel of the church in Sardis write: "The words of him who has the seven spirits of God and the seven stars.
revcb
I know your works. You have the reputation of being alive, but you are dead.
revcc
Wake up, and strengthen what remains and is about to die,
revcd
for I have not found your works complete in the sight of my God.
revce
Remember, then, what you received and heard. Keep it, and repent.
revcf
If you will not wake up, I will come like a thief, and you will not know at what hour I will come against you.
revcg
Yet you have still a few names in Sardis, people who have not soiled their garments, and they will walk with me in white, for they are worthy.
revch
The one who conquers will be clothed thus in white garments, and I will never blot his name out of the book of life.
revci
I will confess his name before my Father and before his angels.
revcj
He who has an ear, let him hear what the Spirit says to the churches.
revck
And to the angel of the church in Philadelphia write: "The words of the holy one, the true one, who has the key of David, who opens and no one will shut, who shuts and no one opens.
revcl
I know your works. Behold, I have set before you an open door, which no one is able to shut.
revcm
I know that you have but little power, and yet you have kept my word and have not denied my name.
revcn
Behold, I will make those of the synagogue of Satan who say that they are Jews and are not, but lie —
revco
behold, I will make them come and bow down before your feet and they will learn that I have loved you.
revcp
Because you have kept my word about patient endurance, I will keep you from the hour of trial that is coming on the whole world, to try those who dwell on the earth.
revcq
I am coming soon. Hold fast to what you have, so that no one may seize your crown.
revcr
The one who conquers, I will make him a pillar in the temple of my God. He will never go out of it,
revcs
and I will write on him the name of my God, and the name of the city of my God, the new Jerusalem, which comes down from my God out of heaven, and my own new name.
revct
He who has an ear, let him hear what the Spirit says to the churches.
revcu
And to the angel of the church in Laodicea write: "The words of the Amen, the faithful and true witness, the beginning of God's creation.
revcv
I know your works: you are neither cold nor hot.
revcw
Would that you were either cold or hot!
revcx
So, because you are lukewarm, and neither hot nor cold, I will spit you out of my mouth. 
revcy
For you say, I am rich, I have prospered, and I need nothing,
revcz
not realizing that you are wretched, pitiable, poor, blind, and naked.
revcç
I counsel you to buy from me gold refined by fire, so that you may be rich,
revcş
and white garments so that you may clothe yourself and the shame of your nakedness may not be seen,
revcö
and salve to anoint your eyes, so that you may see.
revcü
Those whom I love, I reprove and discipline, so be zealous and repent.
revcA
Behold, I stand at the door and knock.
revcB
If anyone hears my voice and opens the door, I will come in to him and eat with him, and he with me.
revcC
The one who conquers, I will grant him to sit with me on my throne,
revcD
as I also conquered and sat down with my Father on his throne.
revcE
He who has an ear, let him hear what the Spirit says to the churches.
aaa
Now the birth of Jesus Christ took place in this way.
aab
When his mother Mary had been betrothed to Joseph, before they came together she was found to be with child from the Holy Spirit.
aac
And her husband Joseph, being a just man and unwilling to put her to shame, resolved to divorce her quietly.
aad
But as he considered these things, behold, an angel of the Lord appeared to him in a dream, saying,
aae
"Joseph, son of David, do not fear to take Mary as your wife, for that which is conceived in her is from the Holy Spirit.
aaf
She will bear a son, and you shall call his name Jesus, for he will save his people from their sins."
aag
All this took place to fulfil what the Lord had spoken by the prophet:
aah
"Behold, the virgin will conceive and bear a son, and they will call his name Immanuel" (which means, God with us).
aai
When Joseph woke from sleep, he did as the angel of the Lord commanded him: 
aaj
he took his wife, but knew her not until she had given birth to a son. And he called his name Jesus.
genda
Now Adam knew Eve his wife, and she conceived and bore Cain, saying, "I have produced a man with the help of the Lord."
gendb
And again, she bore his brother Abel.
gendc
Now Abel was a keeper of sheep, and Cain a worker of the ground.
gendd
In the course of time Cain brought to the Lord an offering of the fruit of the ground, and Abel also brought of the firstborn of his flock and of their fat portions.
gende
And the Lord had regard for Abel and his offering, but for Cain and his offering he had no regard.
gendf
So Cain was very angry, and his face fell.
gendg
The Lord said to Cain, "Why are you angry, and why has your face fallen?
gendh
If you do well, will you not be accepted?
gendi
And if you do not do well, sin is crouching at the door.
gendj
Its desire is for you, but you must rule over it."
gendk
Cain spoke to Abel his brother. And when they were in the field, Cain rose up against his brother Abel and killed him.
gendl
Then the Lord said to Cain, "Where is Abel your brother?"
gendm
He said, "I do not know; am I my brother's keeper?"
gendn
And the Lord said, "What have you done? The voice of your brother's blood is crying to me from the ground.
gendo
And now you are cursed from the ground, which has opened its mouth to receive your brother's blood from your hand.
gendp
When you work the ground, it will no longer yield to you its strength.
gendq
You will be a fugitive and a wanderer on the earth."
gendr
Cain said to the Lord, "My punishment is greater than I can bear.
gends
Behold, you have driven me today away from the ground, and from your face I will be hidden.
gendt
I will be a fugitive and a wanderer on the earth, and whoever finds me will kill me."
gendu
Then the Lord said to him, "Not so! If anyone kills Cain, vengeance will be taken on him sevenfold."
gendv
And the Lord put a mark on Cain, lest any who found him should attack him.
gendw
Then Cain went away from the presence of the Lord and settled in the land of Nod, east of Eden.
gendx
Cain knew his wife, and she conceived and bore Enoch.
gendy
When he built a city, he called the name of the city after the name of his son, Enoch.
gendz
To Enoch was born Irad, and Irad fathered Mehujael, and Mehujael fathered Methushael, and Methushael fathered Lamech.
gendç
And Lamech took two wives. The name of one was Adah, and the name of the other Zillah.
gendş
Adah bore Jabal; he was the father of those who dwell in tents and have livestock.
gendö
His brother's name was Jubal; he was the father of all those who play the lyre and pipe.
gendü
Zillah also bore Tubal-cain; he was the forger of all instruments of bronze and iron.
gendA
The sister of Tubal-cain was Naamah.
gendB
Lamech said to his wives: "Adah and Zillah, hear my voice; you wives of Lamech, listen to what I say:
gendC
I have killed a man for wounding me, a young man for striking me.
gendD
If Cain's revenge is sevenfold, then Lamech's is seventy-sevenfold."
gendE
And Adam knew his wife again, and she bore a son and called his name Seth, for she said,
gendF
"God has appointed for me another offspring instead of Abel, for Cain killed him."
gendG
To Seth also a son was born, and he called his name Enosh.
gendH
At that time people began to call upon the name of the Lord.
revda
After this I looked, and behold, a door standing open in heaven!
revdb
And the first voice, which I had heard speaking to me like a trumpet, said,
revdc
"Come up here, and I will show you what must take place after this."
revdd
At once I was in the Spirit, and behold, a throne stood in heaven, with one seated on the throne.
revde
And he who sat there had the appearance of jasper and carnelian,
revdf
and around the throne was a rainbow that had the appearance of an emerald.
revdg
Round the throne were twenty-four thrones, and seated on the thrones were twenty-four elders,
revdh
clothed in white garments, with golden crowns on their heads.
revdi
From the throne came flashes of lightning, and rumblings and peals of thunder,
revdj
and before the throne were burning seven torches of fire, which are the seven spirits of God,
revdk
and before the throne there was as it were a sea of glass, like crystal.
revdl
And around the throne, on each side of the throne, are four living creatures, full of eyes in front and behind:
revdm
the first living creature like a lion, the second living creature like an ox,
revdn
the third living creature with the face of a man, and the fourth living creature like an eagle in flight.
revdo
And the four living creatures, each of them with six wings, are full of eyes all around and within,
revdp
and day and night they never cease to say, "Holy, holy, holy, is the Lord God Almighty, who was and is and is to come!"
revdq
And whenever the living creatures give glory and honour and thanks to him who is seated on the throne, who lives forever and ever,
revdr
the twenty-four elders fall down before him who is seated on the throne and worship him who lives forever and ever.
revds
They cast their crowns before the throne, saying, "Worthy are you, our Lord and God, to receive glory and honour and power,
revdt
for you created all things, and by your will they existed and were created."
ala
At that time Jesus went through the grainfields on the Sabbath.
alb
His disciples were hungry, and they began to pick heads of grain and to eat.
alc
But when the Pharisees saw it, they said to him, "Look, your disciples are doing what is not lawful to do on the Sabbath."
ald
He said to them, "Have you not read what David did when he was hungry, and those who were with him:
ale
how he entered the house of God and ate the bread of the Presence,
alf
which it was not lawful for him to eat nor for those who were with him, but only for the priests?
alg
Or have you not read in the Law how on the Sabbath the priests in the temple profane the Sabbath and are guiltless?
alh
I tell you, something greater than the temple is here.
ali
And if you had known what this means, 'I desire mercy, and not sacrifice', you would not have condemned the guiltless.
alj
For the Son of Man is lord of the Sabbath."
alk
He went on from there and entered their synagogue.
all
And a man was there with a withered hand.
alm
And they asked him, "Is it lawful to heal on the Sabbath?" - so that they might accuse him.
aln
He said to them, "Which one of you who has a sheep, if it falls into a pit on the Sabbath, will not take hold of it and lift it out?
alo
Of how much more value is a man than a sheep!
alp
So it is lawful to do good on the Sabbath."
alq
Then he said to the man, "Stretch out your hand." And the man stretched it out, and it was restored, healthy like the other.
alr
But the Pharisees went out and conspired against him, how to destroy him.
als
Jesus, aware of this, withdrew from there.
alt
And many followed him, and he healed them all and ordered them not to make him known.
alu
This was to fulfil what was spoken by the prophet Isaiah: "Behold, my servant whom I have chosen, my beloved with whom my soul is well pleased.
alv
I will put my Spirit upon him, and he will proclaim justice to the Gentiles.
alw
He will not quarrel or cry aloud, nor will anyone hear his voice in the streets;
alx
a bruised reed he will not break, and a smouldering wick he will not quench
aly
until he brings justice to victory; and in his name the Gentiles will hope."
alz
Then a demon-oppressed man who was blind and mute was brought to him, and he healed him, so that the man spoke and saw.
alç
And all the people were amazed, and said, "Can this be the Son of David?"
alş
But when the Pharisees heard it, they said, "It is only by Beelzebul, the prince of demons, that this man casts out demons."
alö
Knowing their thoughts, he said to them, "Every kingdom divided against itself is laid waste, and no city or house divided against itself will stand.
alü
And if Satan casts out Satan, he is divided against himself. How then will his kingdom stand?
alA
And if I cast out demons by Beelzebul, by whom do your sons cast them out?
alB
Therefore they will be your judges.
alC
But if it is by the Spirit of God that I cast out demons, then the kingdom of God has come upon you.
alD
Or how can someone enter a strong man's house and plunder his goods, unless he first binds the strong man?
alE
Then indeed he may plunder his house.
alF
Whoever is not with me is against me, and whoever does not gather with me scatters.
alG
Therefore I tell you, every sin and blasphemy will be forgiven people, but the blasphemy against the Spirit will not be forgiven.
alH
And whoever speaks a word against the Son of Man will be forgiven, but whoever speaks against the Holy Spirit will not be forgiven,
alI
either in this age or in the age to come.
alJ
Either make the tree good and its fruit good, or make the tree bad and its fruit bad, for the tree is known by its fruit.
alK
You brood of vipers!
alL
How can you speak good, when you are evil?
alM
For out of the abundance of the heart the mouth speaks.
alN
The good person out of his good treasure brings forth good, and the evil person out of his evil treasure brings forth evil.
alO
I tell you, on the day of judgement people will give account for every careless word they speak,
alP
for by your words you will be justified, and by your words you will be condemned."
alQ
Then some of the scribes and Pharisees answered him, saying, "Teacher, we wish to see a sign from you."
alR
But he answered them, "An evil and adulterous generation seeks for a sign,
alS
but no sign will be given to it except the sign of the prophet Jonah.
alT
For just as Jonah was three days and three nights in the belly of the great fish, so will the Son of Man be three days and three nights in the heart of the earth.
alU
The men of Nineveh will rise up at the judgement with this generation and condemn it,
alV
for they repented at the preaching of Jonah, and behold, something greater than Jonah is here.
alW
The queen of the South will rise up at the judgement with this generation and condemn it,
alX
for she came from the ends of the earth to hear the wisdom of Solomon, and behold, something greater than Solomon is here.
alY
"When the unclean spirit has gone out of a person, it passes through waterless places seeking rest, but finds none.
alZ
Then it says, 'I will return to my house from which I came.'
alÇ
And when it comes, it finds the house empty, swept, and put in order.
alŞ
Then it goes and brings with it seven other spirits more evil than itself, and they enter and dwell there,
alÖ
and the last state of that person is worse than the first.
alÜ
So also will it be with this evil generation."
al61
While he was still speaking to the people, behold, his mother and his brothers stood outside, asking to speak to him.
al62
But he replied to the man who told him, "Who is my mother, and who are my brothers?"
al63
And stretching out his hand towards his disciples, he said, "Here are my mother and my brothers!
al64
For whoever does the will of my Father in heaven is my brother and sister and mother."
revea
Then I saw in the right hand of him who was seated on the throne a scroll written within and on the back, sealed with seven seals.
reveb
And I saw a strong angel proclaiming with a loud voice, "Who is worthy to open the scroll and break its seals?"
revec
And no one in heaven or on earth or under the earth was able to open the scroll or to look into it,
reved
and I began to weep loudly because no one was found worthy to open the scroll or to look into it.
revee
And one of the elders said to me, "Weep no more;
revef
behold, the Lion of the tribe of Judah, the Root of David, has conquered,
reveg
so that he can open the scroll and its seven seals."
reveh
And between the throne and the four living creatures and among the elders I saw a Lamb standing,
revei
as though it had been slain,
revej
with seven horns and with seven eyes, which are the seven spirits of God sent out into all the earth.
revek
And he went and took the scroll from the right hand of him who was seated on the throne.
revel
And when he had taken the scroll, the four living creatures and the twenty-four elders fell down before the Lamb,
revem
each holding a harp, and golden bowls full of incense, which are the prayers of the saints.
reven
And they sang a new song, saying, "Worthy are you to take the scroll and to open its seals, for you were slain,
reveo
and by your blood you ransomed people for God from every tribe and language and people and nation,
revep
and you have made them a kingdom and priests to our God,
reveq
and they will reign on the earth."
rever
Then I looked, and I heard around the throne and the living creatures and the elders the voice of many angels,
reves
numbering myriads of myriads and thousands of thousands, saying with a loud voice,
revet
"Worthy is the Lamb who was slain, to receive power and wealth and wisdom and might and honour and glory and blessing!"
reveu
And I heard every creature in heaven and on earth and under the earth and in the sea, and all that is in them, saying,
revev
"To him who sits on the throne and to the Lamb be blessing and honour and glory and might forever and ever!"
revew
And the four living creatures said, "Amen!"
revex
and the elders fell down and worshipped.
ama
That same day Jesus went out of the house and sat beside the sea.
amb
And great crowds gathered about him, so that he got into a boat and sat down.
amc
And the whole crowd stood on the beach.
amd
And he told them many things in parables, saying: "A sower went out to sow.
ame
And as he sowed, some seeds fell along the path, and the birds came and devoured them.
amf
Other seeds fell on rocky ground, where they did not have much soil, and immediately they sprang up, since they had no depth of soil.
amg
But when the sun rose they were scorched, and since they had no root, they withered away.
amh
Other seeds fell among thorns, and the thorns grew up and choked them.
ami
Other seeds fell on good soil and produced grain, some a hundredfold, some sixty, some thirty.
amj
He who has ears, let him hear."
amk
Then the disciples came and said to him, "Why do you speak to them in parables?"
aml
And he answered them, "To you it has been given to know the secrets of the kingdom of heaven, but to them it has not been given.
amm
For to the one who has, more will be given, and he will have an abundance, but from the one who has not, even what he has will be taken away.
amn
This is why I speak to them in parables, because seeing they do not see, and hearing they do not hear, nor do they understand.
amo
Indeed, in their case the prophecy of Isaiah is fulfilled that says:
amp
"'You will indeed hear but never understand, and you will indeed see but never perceive.
amq
For this people's heart has grown dull, and with their ears they can barely hear, and their eyes they have closed,
amr
lest they should see with their eyes and hear with their ears and understand with their heart and turn, and I would heal them.'
ams
But blessed are your eyes, for they see, and your ears, for they hear.
amt
For truly, I say to you, many prophets and righteous people longed to see what you see, and did not see it, and to hear what you hear, and did not hear it.
amu
"Hear then the parable of the sower:
amv
When anyone hears the word of the kingdom and does not understand it, the evil one comes and snatches away what has been sown in his heart.
amw
This is what was sown along the path.
amx
As for what was sown on rocky ground, this is the one who hears the word and immediately receives it with joy,
amy
but he has no root in himself, and is only temporary.
amz
When tribulation or persecution comes because of the word, immediately he falls away.
amç
As for what was sown among thorns, this is the one who hears the word,
amş
but the cares of the world and the deceitfulness of riches choke the word, and it proves unfruitful.
amö
As for what was sown on good soil, this is the one who hears the word and understands it.
amü
He indeed bears fruit and yields, in one case a hundredfold, in another sixty, and in another thirty."
amA
He put another parable before them, saying,
amB
"The kingdom of heaven may be compared to a man who sowed good seed in his field,
amC
but while his men were sleeping, his enemy came and sowed weeds among the wheat and went away.
amD
So when the plants came up and bore grain, then the weeds appeared also.
amE
And the servants of the master of the house came and said to him, 'Master, did you not sow good seed in your field? How then does it have weeds?'
amF
He said to them, 'An enemy has done this.'
amG
So the servants said to him, 'Then do you want us to go and gather them?'
amH
But he said, 'No, lest in gathering the weeds you root up the wheat along with them.
amI
Let both grow together until the harvest,
amJ
and at harvest time I will tell the reapers, Gather the weeds first and bind them in bundles to be burned, but gather the wheat into my barn.'"
amK
He put another parable before them, saying,
amL
"The kingdom of heaven is like a grain of mustard seed that a man took and sowed in his field.
amM
It is the smallest of all seeds, but when it has grown it is larger than all the garden plants
amN
and becomes a tree, so that the birds of the air come and make nests in its branches."
amO
He told them another parable.
amP
"The kingdom of heaven is like leaven that a woman took and hid in three measures of flour, till it was all leavened."
amQ
All these things Jesus said to the crowds in parables; indeed, he said nothing to them without a parable.
amR
This was to fulfil what was spoken by the prophet:
amS
"I will open my mouth in parables;
amT
I will utter what has been hidden since the foundation of the world."
amU
Then he left the crowds and went into the house.
amV
And his disciples came to him, saying, "Explain to us the parable of the weeds of the field."
amW
He answered, "The one who sows the good seed is the Son of Man.
amX
The field is the world, and the good seed is the sons of the kingdom.
amY
The weeds are the sons of the evil one, and the enemy who sowed them is the devil.
amZ
The harvest is the close of the age, and the reapers are angels.
amÇ
Just as the weeds are gathered and burned with fire, so will it be at the close of the age.
amŞ
The Son of Man will send his angels, and they will gather out of his kingdom all causes of sin and all law-breakers, and throw them into the fiery furnace.
amÖ
In that place there will be weeping and gnashing of teeth.
amÜ
Then the righteous will shine like the sun in the kingdom of their Father.
am61
He who has ears, let him hear.
am62
"The kingdom of heaven is like treasure hidden in a field, which a man found and covered up.
am63
Then in his joy he goes and sells all that he has and buys that field.
am64
"Again, the kingdom of heaven is like a merchant in search of fine pearls,
am65
who, on finding one pearl of great value, went and sold all that he had and bought it.
am66
"Again, the kingdom of heaven is like a net that was thrown into the sea and gathered fish of every kind.
am67
When it was full, men drew it ashore and sat down and sorted the good into containers but threw away the bad.
am68
So it will be at the close of the age.
am69
The angels will come out and separate the evil from the righteous and throw them into the fiery furnace.
am70
In that place there will be weeping and gnashing of teeth.
am71
"Have you understood all these things?"
am72
They said to him, "Yes."
am73
And he said to them, "Therefore every scribe who has been trained for the kingdom of heaven is like a master of a house,
am74
who brings out of his treasure what is new and what is old."
am75
And when Jesus had finished these parables, he went away from there,
am76
and coming to his home town he taught them in their synagogue,
am77
so that they were astonished, and said,
am78
"Where did this man get this wisdom and these mighty works?
am79
Is not this the carpenter's son? Is not his mother called Mary?
am80
And are not his brothers James and Joseph and Simon and Judas? And are not all his sisters with us?
am81
Where then did this man get all these things?"
am82
And they took offence at him.
am83
But Jesus said to them, "A prophet is not without honour except in his home town and in his own household."
am84
And he did not do many mighty works there, because of their unbelief.